The Historical Setting
of the Gospels

Objectives

Summarize the main events of Israel’s history from the close of
the Old Testament canon to the destruction of Jerusalem by
the Romans in AD 70.

Identify and summarize the significance of key historical
figures for this period, including Alexander the Great,
Antiochus IV Epiphanes, Judas Maccabeus, Caesar Augustus,
Herod the Great, Pontius Pilate, and Herod Antipas.

Explain the significance of hellenization for the period of Jesus
and the Gospels, including the nature of Ptolemaic and
Seleucid rule in Palestine.

Discuss the events leading up to the Maccabean Revolt and the
period of Jewish independence under the Hasmonean dynasty.

Summarize the nature of Roman rule in Palestine, first under
Herod the Great and then under Roman governors.

Introduction

At the end of the Old Testament period, the dominant power
in the ancient Near East was the Medo-Persian Empire.

When the reader opens the New Testament, four hundred
years have passed, and the Roman Empire is now in control of
the whole of the Mediterranean region.

A survey of the political, religious, and cultural changes that
took place during this period is essential for understanding the
world in which Jesus lived and the birth of the New Testament.

AD or CE?

For similar ecumenical reasons, the designations AD (Anno
Domini, “the year of our Lord”) and BC (Before Christ) are
sometimes replaced with CE (Common Era) and BCE (Before
the Common Era). The Common Era refers to the period in
which Christianity and Judaism have existed together.

The Persian Period (539–334 BC)

The last major historical event in the Old
Testament is the return of the Babylonian exiles
to Israel under the Persian ruler Cyrus the Great.

Unlike the Babylonians, who had destroyed the
temple in Jerusalem and sent the Jews into exile,
Cyrus had an enlightened policy of allowing exiled
peoples to return to their homelands and worship
their gods as they pleased.

After conquering Babylon in 539 BC, Cyrus issued
decrees allowing the Jews to return and rebuild
the city and temple.

The Persian Period (539–334 BC)

Over 42,000 returned with Zerubbabel to rebuild
the temple (Ezra 1–6). More followed with Ezra
(Ezra 7–10), and Nehemiah later returned to
rebuild the walls of Jerusalem (Nehemiah 1–6; c.
445 BC).

The last of the Old Testament books, Malachi, was
written about this time (c. 430 BC).

Old Testament history ends with this return and
restoration of Israel in the land. The period which
followed is called the Second Temple period, or
the intertestamental period

Second Temple Period

“Second Temple” or “Intertestamental” Period?

Many scholars prefer the designation “Second Temple” to
“intertestamental” for the period leading up to the New Testament era.

The first temple, completed by Solomon around 960 BC, was destroyed
by the Babylonians in 587 BC.

The second temple, completed by Zerubbabel in 516 BC (and expanded
later by Herod the Great), was eventually destroyed by the Romans in
AD 70.

Intertestamental period refers to approximately the same time frame,
running from the writing of the last Old Testament book (Malachi;
about 430 BC) to the birth of Jesus (about 4 BC).

Second Temple is the more precise designation since it is unclear
whether “intertestamental” culminates in the birth of Jesus, the writing
of the New Testament (late first century), or its official recognition as
canon (fourth century?). Second Temple is also more acceptable to
Jewish scholars, who do not recognize the divine inspiration of the
second (New) Testament.

The Greek Period (334–166 BC)

Alexander the Great and the Hellenization of
Palestine

One of the most remarkable leaders of the ancient
world was Alexander the Great, the son of Philip ii of
Macedon.

Philip was an ambitious ruler who had succeeded in
unifying the Greek city-states and developing the
Macedonians into a mobile and effective army.

When Philip’s plans to overthrow the Persian Empire
were cut short by his assassination in 336 BC,
Alexander took over both his father’s throne and his
passion for conquest.

The Greek Period (334–166 BC)

Though only twenty years old, Alexander quickly
consolidated his power in Greece and then swept
eastward with his army.

He repeatedly defeated the Persians and, in a very
short time, conquered the whole of the eastern
Mediterranean, including Syria, Egypt, Persia, and
Babylon.

Although Alexander died suddenly at only thirty-three
years of age (probably from malaria complicated by
drunkenness—though poison has also been
suggested!), in a mere thirteen years he established a
vast empire stretching from Greece to Egypt in the
south and India in the east.

Alexander the Great’s Conquests

The Greek Period (334–166 BC)

While Alexander’s swift conquest proved his military genius, his
most influential role in history is his promotion of the process of
hellenization. Hellas means Greece, and hellenization refers to
the spread of Greek language and culture.

Alexander, who had been trained by the philosopher Aristotle,
had a deep affection for all things Greek and sought to introduce
Greek ways throughout the territories he conquered.

He founded Greek-style cities with theaters, public baths, and
gymnasiums and encouraged the introduction of Greek customs
and manners.

Alexander also settled Greek colonists throughout his empire
and encouraged his soldiers to marry local women. Although the
Romans would later conquer the Greeks, in many ways the
Greeks conquered the Romans, as the latter adopted Greek
models of art, literature, philosophy, and religion.

The Greek Period (334–166 BC)

Because the Jews did not resist Alexander’s conquest, they
were allowed a degree of independence, and temple
worship continued unhindered.

Hellenization had a profound impact on Jewish society.
Virtually every inhabitant of Israel came into contact with
Greek culture, whether through soldiers, government
officials, merchants, or landowners.

While all of Judaism became hellenized to one degree or
another, this clash of cultures inevitably produced conflict.

Many Jews—particularly those of the upper
classes—willingly embraced Greek customs and philosophy
as superior to their own.

Others opposed what they viewed as the paganization of
Judaism. The stage was being set for crisis and conflict.

The Greek Period (334–166 BC)

One of the most important results of hellenization
for the background to the New Testament was
the emergence of koinē (“common”) Greek as the
lingua franca, or trade and diplomatic language,
of the eastern Mediterranean.

Throughout the “civilized” (Roman) world, anyone
who could not speak Greek was considered a
barbarian.

Though Latin was the official language of the
Roman Empire, it was spoken mainly in the west,
and Greek remained the lingua franca throughout
the empire.

The Greek Period (334–166 BC)

The Israel of Jesus’ day was trilingual.

Hebrew was still read and spoken in religious contexts

Aramaic—the lingua franca prior to Alexander’s
conquests—was the language of the common people;

Greek was the language of trade and government. (Latin
would have also been spoken by Roman officials.)

Jesus probably conversed in all three languages,
though most of his teaching was in Aramaic.

The New Testament books are all written in koinē
Greek, though the style and literary quality differs
among the various authors.

Occasional Aramaic, Hebrew, and Latin words appear,
transliterated with Greek letters.

The Greek Period (334–166 BC)

It can be said that divine providence can be seen
in the conquests of Alexander and the
dissemination of the Greek language throughout
the Mediterranean region. This common language
enabled the Christian missionaries to preach,
teach, and write in a single language among the
diverse peoples of the Roman Empire.

Ptolemaic Domination of Israel (323–198 BC)

When Alexander died in 323 BC, a power struggle ensued
for control of his empire.

War and conflict between his four leading generals
eventually resulted in the establishment of two great
dynasties.

The dynasty of the Ptolemies was centered in Egypt, with
Alexandria as its capital.

The dynasty of the Seleucids was centered in Syria, with
Antioch as its capital.

Because Israel was strategically located between Syria and
Egypt, the nation became caught in a tug-of-war between
these two rivals.

The Ptolemies gained control of Israel and ruled her for
125 years.

The Jews lived in relative peace and prosperity under
Ptolemaic rule.

Ptolemaic Domination of Israel (323–198 BC)

During this time, Alexandria, Egypt, the capital of the
Ptolemaic Empire, developed into a major center of
scholarship and learning.

A vibrant Greek-speaking Jewish community flourished
there. Since most Jews no longer spoke or read Hebrew,
the need arose for a translation of the Hebrew Scriptures
into Greek.

One of the most significant literary achievements of this
period was the translation of the Septuagint (abbreviated
LXX), the Greek version of the Old Testament.

The Septuagint became the primary Bible of both Jews of
the Diaspora and the early Christians.

Diaspora means “dispersion” and refers to Jews who were
not living in Israel but were dispersed throughout the rest
of the Mediterranean world.

The Septuagint

The Septuagint was the most widely used Greek
translation of the Old Testament.

The term is derived from the legend about its origin found
in the Letter of Aristeas, written about the end of the
second century BC.

According to this letter, during the reign of Ptolemy II
Philadelphus (284–247 BC), Ptolemy’s librarian Demetrius found
that he was lacking a Greek translation of the Law of the Jews.

Ptolemy sent a request to Eleazar, the Jewish high priest in
Jerusalem, who sent 72 scholars, six from each of the twelve
tribes, to undertake the task. The translation was reportedly
completed in 72 days and was read to the assembled Jewish
community, which rejoiced at its accuracy.

A later version of the story claims that by divine inspiration, all
the scholars working independently produced an identical Greek
text!

The Septuagint

The name Septuagint comes from the Latin word for
seventy (septuaginta), a rounded-off reference to the
72 scholars who supposedly completed the work. The
Roman numeral for seventy, LXX, is used as an
abbreviation for the translation.

Though the details of the story are doubtful, it is likely
that a Greek version of the Pentateuch arose in
Alexandria in the third century BC. Because Hebrew
was no longer widely spoken, Jews of the Diaspora
(“dispersion,” Jews living outside of Israel) needed a
Greek translation of the Scriptures.

The Law was probably translated first, and the rest of
the Hebrew Bible (the Prophets and the Writings)
gradually followed.

The Septuagint

Though far from a perfect translation, the Septuagint had a
profound effect on the Judaism of the Diaspora and on the
origins of Christianity:

The LXX became the Bible of Diaspora Jews, most of whom
no longer spoke Hebrew. The translation was widely used
in the synagogues throughout the Mediterranean.

The LXX provided Hebrew senses to many Greek words.
For example, in classical Greek, the term doxa generally
carried the sense of “opinion.” Its use in the LXX to
translate the Hebrew kābôd helped define its sense as
“glory.” The LXX thus aided in the translation of Old
Testament concepts for a Greek audience and gave the
Christians a ready-made Greek vocabulary for preaching a
gospel whose background lay in the Old Testament.

The Septuagint

The LXX provided the early Christians with a Bible
that was understandable throughout the
Mediterranean world. Christians could use it
when preaching to both Jews and Gentiles. In this
way, the LXX became a powerful apologetic tool
for the early church. Most Old Testament
quotations in the New Testament are taken from
the LXX.

Codex Sinaiticus

- a fourth-century
manuscript containing
the Septuagint (Greek
Old Testament) and
the New Testament

Seleucid Domination of Palestine (198–166 BC)

There was constant war and strife between the
Ptolemies of Egypt and the Seleucids of Syria.

The Syrians failed repeatedly to gain control of Israel
until 198 BC, when the Seleucid ruler Antiochus III
(known as Antiochus the Great) defeated Egypt at the
battle of Paneion and occupied Israel.

Antiochus’s aspirations for dominance were
dampened, however, as he faced a new and growing
threat from the west, the rising power of Rome.

When he invaded Greece, Rome intervened, forcing
him to withdraw and requiring him to pay a huge
annual tribute. The Romans also took his son to Rome
as a hostage.

Seleucid Domination of Palestine (198–166 BC)

Antiochus IV “Epiphanes.” When Antiochus III’s son
was released from Rome fourteen years later, he
returned to Syria and succeeded his brother Seleucus
IV as ruler of the Seleucid Empire.

Under Antiochus IV (175–163 BC), Israel would face
perhaps its greatest threat to survival ever.

Antiochus called himself Epiphanes, “manifest
one”—a claim to be a god. His erratic behavior,
however, earned him the nickname “Epimanes,”
meaning “madman.”

Antiochus was not satisfied with the gradual
assimilation of Hellenistic ideas which had taken place
under the Ptolemies. He sought to bring Israel fully
into his empire by turning it into a Hellenistic state.

Seleucid Domination of Palestine (198–166 BC)

Facing crushing tribute to Rome, he increased taxation and
repeatedly looted the treasures of the Jerusalem temple.

He sold the office of high priest to the highest bidder, first to
Jason, the brother of the high priest Onias III, and later to a man
named Menelaus, who did not even have priestly ancestry.

Jason, an ardent Hellenist, began to turn Jerusalem into a Greek
city, building a gymnasium below the sacred temple site.
Greek-style games were held, in which Jewish youths competed
nude in Greek style.

Operations were even performed to reverse the effects of
circumcision.

While many Jews were enamored with Hellenism and so were
receptive to such changes, others were outraged.

Increasing division arose between reforming Hellenists, who
favored the adoption of Greek ideas, and conservative Hasidim
(meaning “holy ones”), who opposed them.

1 Maccabees 1:44–50

The king [Antiochus] sent letters by messengers to
Jerusalem and the towns of Judah; he directed them
to follow customs strange to the land, to forbid burnt
offerings and sacrifices and drink offerings in the
sanctuary, to profane sabbaths and festivals, to defile
the sanctuary and the priests, to build altars and
sacred precincts and shrines for idols, to sacrifice
swine and other unclean animals, and to leave their
sons uncircumcised. They were to make themselves
abominable by everything unclean and profane, so
that they would forget the law and change all the
ordinances.

He added, “And whoever does not obey the command
of the king shall die.”

Coin with the bust of
Antiochus IV
“Epiphanes,” whose
policy of forced
hellenization
provoked the
Maccabean revolt.

Seleucid Domination of Palestine (198–166 BC)

The situation went from bad to worse after one of
Antiochus’s military campaigns against Egypt.

Outside of Alexandria, a Roman diplomat met him and
ordered him to turn back or face the wrath of Rome.
Knowing firsthand the power of Rome from his years
as a hostage, Antiochus withdrew in humiliation.

Aware that many in Jerusalem were still loyal to the
Egyptian Ptolemies, Antiochus vented his anger
against the city by looting the temple, destroying the
city walls, and killing thousands of citizens. In the dark
days that followed, he moved to suppress Judaism.

Seleucid Domination of Palestine (198–166 BC)

Sabbath observance, circumcision, and keeping the
law were banned. Copies of Scripture were
confiscated and burned.

On the 25th day of Chislev (December), 167 BC, an
altar dedicated to Zeus Olympius was set up in the
Jerusalem temple, and pigs and other unclean animals
were offered as sacrifices.

This idolatrous desecration of the temple is referred
to in Daniel as the “abomination of desolation”—the
sacrilege which brings destruction (Dan. 11:31; 12:11).

Jesus would later draw on this powerful imagery to
predict the horrors of the siege and destruction of
Jerusalem in Ad 70 (Mark 13:14, par.).

The Maccabees and
Jewish Independence (166–63 BC)

Though the desecration of the temple by Antiochus
Epiphanes was one of the darkest times in Jewish
history, out of this came one of the most exciting
times, the Maccabean Revolt and a period of Jewish
independence.

The Maccabees and
Jewish Independence (166–63 BC)

The Maccabean Revolt (166–135 BC)

Pious Israelites realized that Antiochus’s actions
threatened their national and religious existence.

Rebellion broke out in the Judean village of Modein,
where an old priest named Mattathias was ordered by
a Syrian official to offer a pagan sacrifice.

Mattathias refused, and another Jew stepped forward
to perform the rite.

The Maccabees and
Jewish Independence (166–63 BC)

The Maccabean Revolt (166–135 BC)

Infuriated, Mattathias rushed forward and killed both
the man and the Syrian official.

He destroyed the pagan altar and fled with his five
sons into the hills.

There they gathered an army of rebels to fight the
Syrians.

They were joined by the Hasidim, the pious separatists
who desired to purge Judaism of pagan influence.

The Maccabees and
Jewish Independence (166–63 BC)

The Maccabean Revolt (166–135 BC)

Mattathias died in 166 BC, leaving his son Judas to
lead the revolt (166–160 BC).

Judas’s prowess in battle earned him the nickname
“Maccabeus,” from the Aramaic word meaning
“hammer.” From this name, the rebellion came to be
called the Maccabean Revolt, and its leaders the
Maccabees.

Judas developed the Jews into an effective guerrilla
army and repeatedly defeated the Syrians in battle.

After some setbacks, he eventually succeeded in
liberating the temple in Jerusalem.

On Hanukkah, the celebration of the victory of the
Maccabees, lamps are lit to show that darkness will
give way to light.

The Maccabees and
Jewish Independence (166–63 BC)

The Maccabean Revolt (166–135 BC)

He defeated them on Chislev (December) 25, 164 BC,
exactly three years after the desecration by Antiochus
Epiphanes, Judas reinitiated Jewish sacrifices.

This victory became commemorated in the Jewish
festival of Hanukkah, meaning “dedication” (also
called the Festival of Lights).

The story of the victory of Judas and his brothers is
told in the apocryphal books of 1 and 2 Maccabees.

The Maccabees and
Jewish Independence (166–63 BC)

The Hasmonean Dynasty (135–63 BC)

After Judas was killed in battle in 160 BC, leadership
passed to his brothers, first Jonathan (160–143 BC)
and then Simon (143–135 BC).

Simon eventually gained political independence from
the Syrians, taking the title “leader and high priest.”

He thus established the Hasmonean dynasty (named
after Hasmon, an ancestor of Mattathias), a line of
priest-kings which would rule Israel until the Roman
occupation in 63 BC.

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

Roman domination of Palestine began in 63 BC, when the
Roman general Pompey captured a Jerusalem weakened
by a power struggle between two Hasmoneans, Hyrcanus II
and Aristobulus II, both sons of Alexander Jannaeus.

The conquering Romans made Hyrcanus II high priest and
ethnarch (“ruler of a people”—a title for a minor ruler).

The real power behind the throne, however, lay with
Hyrcanus’s advisor, a man named Antipater who had
gained the favor of the Roman authorities.

The Romans made Antipater governor of Judea, and he
appointed his sons Phasael and Herod as military
governors of Jerusalem and Galilee.

Although Antipater was an Idumean (or Edomite) rather
than a Jew, the Romans made little distinction since the
Jews had ruled Idumea under the Hasmoneans.

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

Because of Antipater’s loyalty to and military support
for the Romans, Julius Caesar granted favored status
to the Jews.

Taxes were reduced and the city walls of Jerusalem
were rebuilt. Jewish territories were exempted from
providing troops for Roman military service.

Most significant, Judaism was named a religio licita, a
“legal religion,” with the full protection of Rome. This
action exempted Jews from pagan religious practices
and, later, from the worship of the emperor required
of all Roman subjects.

It also was significant for the spread of the gospel,
since Christianity was viewed in its early days as a sect
within Judaism.

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

When Antipater was killed in 43 BC, a power struggle
ensued between Antigonus, the son of Aristobolus II,
and Antipater’s two sons, Herod and Phasael.

Phasael was captured and committed suicide, but
Herod fled to Rome.

There he appealed to the Romans for help and was
appointed king of Judea.

Returning to Israel with a Roman army, he defeated
and executed Antigonus, the last of the Hasmonean
rulers.

The Hasmonean dynasty was over. The Herodian
dynasty had begun.

Map of the Roman Empire showing the provinces

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

Herod “the Great” ruled as king of the Jews under
Roman authority for thirty-three years, from 37–4 BC.

It is this Herod who appears in the account of Jesus’
birth (Matt. 2:1–19; Luke 1:5).

From the start, Herod proved to be an extraordinary
political survivor.

When civil war broke out in Rome between Mark
Antony and Octavian, Herod first sided with Antony
and his ally Cleopatra VII, queen of Egypt.

When Octavian defeated Antony and Cleopatra at
Actium in 31 BC, Herod immediately switched sides,
convincing Octavian of his loyalty.

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

Following his victory, Octavian returned to Rome,
where the Roman Senate made him imperator, or
supreme military leader, and gave him the honorary
title “Augustus” (“exalted one”).

Historians mark this event as the end of the Roman
Republic and the beginning of the Roman Empire, the
transfer from rule by the Senate to rule by a supreme
emperor.

Under the patronage of Octavian—now Caesar
Augustus—Herod’s position as king of the Jews was
secure.

Herod would prove to be a loyal subject to his Roman
overlords, maintaining order in Israel and protecting
the western flank of the Roman Empire.

Roman Soldier

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

Herod was a strange mix of a clever and efficient ruler
and a cruel tyrant.

He was distrustful, jealous, and brutal, ruthlessly
crushing any potential opposition.

Because he was an Idumean, the Jews never accepted
him as their legitimate king, a rejection which
infuriated him.

Having usurped the Hasmonean rulers, he constantly
feared conspiracy.

To legitimize his claim to the throne, he divorced his
wife Doris and married the Hasmonean princess
Miriamne, later executing her when he suspected she
was plotting against him.

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

Three of his sons, another wife, and his mother-in-law
met the same fate when they too were suspected of
conspiracy.

The Roman emperor Augustus once said he would
rather be Herod’s pig than his son, a play on words in
Greek, since the two words sound alike (hus and
huios).

Herod, trying to be a legitimate Jew, would not eat
pork, but he freely murdered his sons!

Matthew’s account of Herod’s slaughter of the infants
in Bethlehem fits well with what we know of the
king’s ambition, paranoia, and cruelty (Matt. 2:1–18).

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

At the same time, Herod presented himself as the
protector of Judaism and sought to gain the favor of
the Jews.

He encouraged the development of the synagogue
communities and in time of calamity remitted taxes
and supplied the people with free grain.

He was also a great builder, a role which earned him
the title “the Great.”

His greatest project was the rebuilding and
beautification of the temple in Jerusalem, restoring it
to even greater splendor than in the time of Solomon.

One of the many building projects of Herod the Great, the Herodium is located
3.5 miles southeast of Bethlehem. According to Josephus, it served as a palace
and a fortress for Herod, and he was buried here in 4 BC. An Artificial hill that
rises 2500 Ft above sea level.

20 When the disciples saw it, they marveled, saying, “How did the fig tree
wither at once?” 21 And Jesus answered them, “Truly, I say to you, if you have
faith and do not doubt, you will not only do what has been done to the fig tree,
but even if you say to this mountain, ‘Be taken up and thrown into the sea,’ it
will happen. 22 And whatever you ask in prayer, you will receive, if you have
faith.” – Matthew 21 (Said with the Herodium in the background)

One of the many building projects of Herod the Great, the Herodium is located
3.5 miles southeast of Bethlehem. According to Josephus, it served as a palace
and a fortress for Herod, and he was buried here in 4 BC. An Artificial hill that
rises 2500 Ft above sea level.

20 When the disciples saw it, they marveled, saying, “How did the fig tree
wither at once?” 21 And Jesus answered them, “Truly, I say to you, if you have
faith and do not doubt, you will not only do what has been done to the fig tree,
but even if you say to this mountain, ‘Be taken up and thrown into the sea,’ it
will happen. 22 And whatever you ask in prayer, you will receive, if you have
faith.” – Matthew 21 (Said with the Herodium in the background)

A reproduction of Herod’s palace in Jerusalem. From
the model of Jerusalem at the Holy Land Hotel.

An aqueduct built by Herod the Great

in Caesarea Maritima

Caesarea Maritima, built by Herod the Great, was the center
of Roman administration for Palestine during the time of
Christ.

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

Judea prospered economically during Herod’s reign.

He extended Israel’s territory through conquest and
built fortifications to defend the Roman frontiers.

A committed Hellenist and an admirer of Roman
culture, Herod built Greek-style theaters,
amphitheaters, and hippodromes (outdoor stadiums
for horse and chariot racing) throughout the land.

While this earned him the favor of many upper-class
Jews, it brought disdain from the more conservative
Pharisees and the common people.

The Herodians mentioned in the Gospels (Mark 3:6;
12:13) were Hellenistic Jewish supporters of the
Herodian dynasty, who favored the stability and
status quo brought by Roman authority.

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

Herod died in 4 BC (cf. Matt. 2:19), probably from
intestinal cancer.

As a final act of vengeance against his
contemptuous subjects, he rounded up leading
Jews and commanded that at his death they
should be executed.

His reasoning was that if there was no mourning
for his death, at least there would be mourning at
his death! (At Herod’s death, the order was
overruled and the prisoners were released.)

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

The Herodian Dynasty

Herod had changed his will several times during his life, and after his
death it was contested by three of his sons. They appealed to Caesar
Augustus, who divided the kingdom among them.

1. Archelaus (4 BC–AD 6) became ethnarch of Judea, Samaria, and
Idumea, with the promise that if he ruled well, he would be made king.
Instead, he proved to be oppressive and erratic, and Augustus removed
him from office in AD 6.

Matthew notes that Joseph and Mary moved to Galilee to avoid
Archelaus’s rule (Matt. 2:21–23).

When Archelaus was removed from office, Judea and Samaria were
transferred to the control of Roman governors, known as prefects and,
later, procurators.

The most important of these for the study of the New Testament is
Pontius Pilate (AD 26–36) under whose administration Jesus was crucified.

Other governors who appear in the New Testament are Felix (AD 52–59)
and Festus AD (59–62), before whom Paul stood trial (Acts 23–26).

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

The Herodian Dynasty

2. Herod Antipas became tetrarch of Galilee and Perea from his
father’s death in 4 BC until he was deposed by the emperor
Caligula in AD 39.

The title tetrarch originally meant ruler of a fourth part of a region
but came to be used of any minor ruler.

This is the Herod of Jesus’ public ministry.

He imprisoned and eventually executed John the Baptist when
John spoke out against his marriage to Herodias, his brother
Philip’s ex-wife (Luke 3:19–20; Mark 6:17–29).

He also wondered about Jesus’ identity when people speculated
that John had risen from the dead (Mark 6:14–16, par.).

When warned by some Pharisees that Herod was seeking his life,
Jesus derisively called him “that fox,” probably a reference to his
cunning and deceit (Luke 13:31–32).

Eventually, Antipas got his wish to see Jesus when Pilate sent Jesus
to stand before him at his trial (Luke 23:7–12; cf. Acts 4:27).

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

The Herodian Dynasty

2. Herod Antipas became tetrarch of Galilee and Perea from his
father’s death in 4 BC until he was deposed by the emperor
Caligula in AD 39.

The title tetrarch originally meant ruler of a fourth part of a region
but came to be used of any minor ruler.

This is the Herod of Jesus’ public ministry.

He imprisoned and eventually executed John the Baptist when
John spoke out against his marriage to Herodias, his brother
Philip’s ex-wife (Luke 3:19–20; Mark 6:17–29).

He also wondered about Jesus’ identity when people speculated
that John had risen from the dead (Mark 6:14–16, par.).

When warned by some Pharisees that Herod was seeking his life,
Jesus derisively called him “that fox,” probably a reference to his
cunning and deceit (Luke 13:31–32).

Eventually, Antipas got his wish to see Jesus when Pilate sent Jesus
to stand before him at his trial (Luke 23:7–12; cf. Acts 4:27).

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

The Herodian Dynasty

3. Herod Philip became tetrarch of Iturea, Trachonitis, Gaulanitis,
Auranitis, and Batanea, regions north and east of Galilee. He died
without an heir, and his territory became part of the Roman
province of Syria.

He is mentioned in the New Testament only in Luke 3:1 (the Philip
of Mark 6:17 [cf. Matt. 14:3] is a different son of Herod the Great).

Only two other members of the Herodian dynasty appear in the
New Testament, both in Acts.

Herod Agrippa I was the son of Aristobulus and the grandson of Herod
the Great. He executed James, the brother of John, and arrested Peter
(Acts 12). His death at Caesarea as judgment by God is r Corded both by
Luke and by the Jewish historian Josephus (Acts 12:19–23; Josephus, Ant.
19.8.2 §§343–52).

Herod Agrippa II was the son of Agrippa I. It was this Herod, together
with his sister Bernice, who was invited by the Roman governor Festus to
hear Paul’s defense at Caesarea (Acts 25–26). Another sister, Drusilla,
was married to the Roman governor Felix (Acts 24:24).

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

Roman Rule and the Pax Romana

When Augustus became emperor in 31 BC, the Roman
Empire entered a period of relative peace known as the Pax
Romana (“Roman Peace”).

Never before had the whole Mediterranean region had the
kind of political stability that Rome brought. The
Mediterranean Sea became a “Roman Lake.”

The stability brought by Roman occupation allowed relative
freedom of travel and a large degree of order throughout the
empire, a situation ideal for the spread of Christianity.

The Romans built roads, which greatly aided the traveling
missionaries and Roman forces, and the Roman system of
law and order gave Christians a measure of protection as
they went from town to town preaching the gospel.

Caesar Augustus built the “Altar of Peace” in Rome
to celebrate his inauguration of the Pax Romana.

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

Roman Rule and the Pax Romana

Roman Government. As emperor, Augustus reorganized the
Roman provinces, dividing them into two types, senatorial and
imperial.

The senatorial provinces were governed by proconsuls appointed
by the Roman Senate for one-year terms. These were usually the
more loyal and peaceful Roman territories, with little need for a
large military presence.

Two proconsuls are named in the book of Acts, Sergius Paulus of
Cyprus (13:7–8) and Gallio of Achaia (18:12).

The imperial provinces were governed by legates appointed by the
emperor himself. These provinces were generally near the
frontiers of the empire, where most of the Roman legions were
based. Quirinius, mentioned in Luke 2:2, was legate of Syria from
AD 6–9.

Proconsuls and legates both were from the senatorial ranks, the
highest aristocratic class in Roman society

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

Roman Rule and the Pax Romana

A third class of governors known as prefects and, later,
procurators were from the lower “equestrian” ranks of
the Roman aristocracy and governed smaller, newer, or
more rebellious imperial provinces.

Judea became such a province in AD 6 when Archelaus,
the son of Herod the Great, was deposed.

All of these governors (proconsuls, legates, prefects,
procurators) exercised imperium, the authority to act
semi-autonomously under the terms of an original
provincial charter.

As long as taxes were collected and rebellions put
down, they were given a relatively free hand.

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

Roman Rule and the Pax Romana

Some outlying Roman territories, like Judea under
Herod the Great, functioned not as provinces but as
client kingdoms ruled by local vassal kings.

Such kings were approved and installed by the
emperor. These kingdoms tended to function as
“buffer states” between Rome and the enemies on
her frontiers.

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

Judea under Roman Governors.

When Herod’s son Archelaus was removed and exiled by
Augustus in AD 6, Judea converted from a client state to an
imperial province, governed by prefects and procurators. It
would return to rule by king for a brief time under Herod’s
grandson Agrippa I (AD 41–44).

While the seat of Roman government in Judea was at
Caesarea on the Mediterranean coast, the governor would
come to Jerusalem to maintain order during the various
festivals.

This is why the prefect Pontius Pilate was present in
Jerusalem during Jesus’ trial.

While the Roman governors had a mixed history of tolerance
and oppression, most exhibited a general insensitivity toward
the Jews.

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

Judea under Roman Governors.

Pilate, who governed Judea from AD 26–36, was no
exception.

When he first arrived in AD 26, he provoked protests by
secretly bringing army standards bearing the images of
Roman emperors—idols in Jewish eyes—into Jerusalem.

On another occasion, demonstrations broke out when Pilate
used money from the temple treasury to build an aqueduct
for Jerusalem.

Pilate sent soldiers to surround and attack the protestors,
killing many. Luke 13:1 refers to a similar episode near the
Temple Mount, where Pilate massacred some Galileans,
“mixing their blood with their sacrifices.”

Typical of the Romans, Pilate met protest with ruthless and
overwhelming force.

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

Roman Taxation.

The cost of maintaining the vast Roman Empire was enormous, and Rome
imposed a variety of taxes on its citizens, from direct poll and land taxes to
indirect tolls or customs on goods in transit.

During the time of Jesus, direct taxes were collected by officials of the
emperor, but the right to collect indirect taxes was generally leased to the
highest bidder.

These were often members of the Roman equestrian class who would
then use publicans, or “tax farmers,” to oversee the collection.

This system was open to great abuse and Corruption, since Rome did not
generally control the surcharges imposed by their agents.

Zacchaeus is identified in Luke as a “chief tax collector,” probably a tax
farmer with authority over other collectors (Luke 19:2).

Levi may be a subordinate to a tax farmer (Mark 2:14, par.). Since he is
sitting in his “tax booth” on the road when Jesus encounters him, he may
have been collecting customs on goods in transit, either for the Romans or
for the local administration of Herod Antipas.

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

Roman Taxation.

The weight of this taxation could be devastating to a poor
craftsman or farmer in Israel.

Tax collectors were despised, not only because of their
reputation for extortion but also because they worked for
the hated Romans.

A later rabbinic saying goes so far as to say it is permissible to
lie to tax collectors to protect one’s property (m. Ned. 3:4)!

Jesus’ association with tax collectors was an important part
of his identification with the sinners and outcasts in Israel.

In addition to government taxes, Jews both in Israel and
throughout the empire paid a half-shekel temple tax to pay
for the completion and maintenance of the Jerusalem
temple.

After the destruction of the temple in AD 70, this tax was
changed to a poll tax and was used to maintain the temple of
Jupiter which the Romans built on the Temple Mount.

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

The Jewish Revolt of AD 66–73

Various factors converged to make Palestine a hotbed
of dissent and political insurrection:

Traditional conflict between hellenizers and conservatives

Widespread Corruption of and oppression by wealthy
aristocrats and landowners

Severe Roman taxation

Heavy-handed Roman suppression of opposition

At times incompetent and insensitive Roman
administration

These factors, together with the history of successful
revolt under the Maccabees, set the stage for the
Jewish Revolt of AD 66–73.

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

The Jewish Revolt of AD 66–73

Various protests and minor revolts had occurred throughout the first
century, but all had been quickly suppressed by the Romans.

Full rebellion erupted in AD 66, when Gessius Florus was procurator of
Judea.

The emperor Nero sent his general Vespasian to put down the revolt.

Vespasian began conquering the cities of Galilee and Judea, but the siege
of Jerusalem was delayed when Nero died and a struggle ensued over his
succession.

Vespasian was proclaimed emperor by his troops and returned to Rome to
defeat his rivals, leaving his son Titus to complete the battle for Jerusalem.

In AD 70, after a horrific three-year siege, Jerusalem was taken and the
temple destroyed.

Josephus, who was present at the destruction, portrays it in gruesome
detail. - Many died from a terrible famine; others were killed by Jewish
infighting and by desperate bandits in the city; many thousands more
were slaughtered by the Romans when they breached the walls.

The Arch of Titus, constructed by his brother Domitian (later
an emperor) to honor the destruction of Jerusalem in AD 70.

A detail on the Arch of Titus showing Roman soldiers
carrying away the treasures of the temple, including the
golden Menorah.

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

The Jewish Revolt of AD 66–73

Though pockets of Jewish resistance held out for
several years after Jerusalem’s collapse, defeat was
inevitable.

The last citadel to fall was the mountaintop fortress
at Masada in AD 73.

To reach it, the Romans built a massive earthen
ramp (still visible today). according to Josephus,
when the Romans finally breached the walls, they
found that the 900 Jewish defenders had
committed suicide rather than surrender.

Remnants of the Roman camp at Masada have
been excavated.

Remnants of the Roman camp at Masada have
been excavated.

Excavations on Masada.

The fortress of Masada, where Jewish Zealots held out for
several years against the Romans. The Roman siege ramp is
still visible in this aerial view.

Judea Capta Coin celebrating Titus’s defeat of Jerusalem. Caesar
Vespasian is on one side, and on the obverse is a Roman soldier,
foot on a skull, with a weeping Judean woman and the inscription
“Judea Conquered.” S.C. means that the Senate was consulted to
mint the coin.

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

After the War

After the war, Judea was reorganized as a Roman province,
overseen by a legate with a permanent Roman legion stationed at
Caesarea.

The war had a profound and transforming effect on Judaism. With
the destruction of the temple, the priestly hierarchy lost its
influence and eventually disappeared from history.

Study of Torah and worship in the synagogue replaced the
sacrificial system as the heart of Jewish religious life.

Particularly significant in this regard was the work of Rabbi
Johanan ben Zakkai, who in the years after the Jewish War
established an academy for the study of the law at Jamnia (or
Jabneh) on the Mediterranean coast.

The discussions of this school and others like it unified Judaism into
a relatively homogenous religious movement centered on the
study of the law. This marks the beginning of rabbinic Judaism, the
antecedent of orthodox Judaism of today.

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

After the War

The destruction of Jerusalem also had a major impact on the
young and growing Christian movement.

Jesus had predicted the destruction of Jerusalem, and
Christians saw her collapse and the cessation of the temple
ritual and sacrifices as God’s judgment on Israel for rejecting
the Messiah and as divine vindication that a new era of
salvation had begun.

This new era was based not on animal sacrifices but on Jesus’
once-for-all sacrifice on the cross.

The geographic and ethnic center of Christianity also shifted
after the war. While before, Christians saw Jerusalem as the
mother church, afterward Jewish Christianity decreased in
influence.

The split with Judaism which had begun throughout the
Christian communities gained momentum.

The Roman Period (63 BC–AD 135)

A second Jewish rebellion, known as the Bar Kokhba Revolt, broke
out in AD 132 when the emperor Hadrian banned circumcision and
ordered the building of a temple of Jupiter on the Temple Mount.

The Jewish revolutionaries were led this time by Simon bar Koseba,
a charismatic leader who was hailed by the famous rabbi Akiba as
the Messiah.

Simon was nicknamed “Bar Kokhba” (“son of the star”), a reference
to the messianic “star” prophecy of Numbers 24:17.

Again the mighty Roman legions moved in, and by AD 135, the
rebellion had been crushed. After his defeat and humiliation, Bar
Koseba was derisively called Bar Koziba, “son of a lie.”

The Romans made Jerusalem a pagan city and forbade Jews from
entering it on pain of death. Circumcision, observance of the
Sabbath, and study of the law were banned. Not until 1948 would
Israel emerge again as a political state.
